# 1. Introduction
With advancements in HTML, CSS, JavaScript, web browser capabilities and Internet speeds,
more and more enterprise functionality is being migrated to the web.  This has led to more
and more data being available to users over the web and therefore increased demans for
rich reporting capabilities in web applications.

[Spring MVC](http://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/spring-framework-reference/htmlsingle/#spring-web)
is a popular Java framework for building web applications.  It runs well across Java application
servers and provides tight integration with loads of popular Java tools such as source code
editors (Eclipse, IDEA, Netbeans), build managers (Maven, ANT, Ivy, Gradle).  It also usually
works well with most languages that work on the JVM (for example, Scala and Groovy), making
it popular for developing web applications on the JVM.

[Jasper Reports](http://community.jaspersoft.com/) is a Java based reporting library boasting
of a fairly comprehensive set of reporting features, a visual report design tool, a
flexible report generation framework, support for multiple report formats such as *HTML*, *XHTML*,
*PDF*, *Microsoft Excel 97 (.xls)*, *Microsoft Excel 2000 (.xlsx)*, *CSV*,*Rich Text*,
*Open Data Format (.odf)* and more.

This sample application demonstrates one possible way of adding Jasper Reports to a Spring MVC
application.  For other integration possibilities see the last section below.

# 2. Overview
This sample application contains two types of reports:

1. Tabular
1. Chart/Graph

### 2.1. Context
The sample application has been developed for a fictitious company called Coffee Inc. a
high-street shop that sells coffee and related items.  The reports generated by the application
are meant for use by the employees of Coffee Inc.

### 2.2. Tabular report - Order History
This report shows all orders received by Coffee Inc.  It contains the following table:

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>S. No.</th>
      <th>Order Date</th>
      <th>Customer Name</th>
      <th>Order Total</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
</table>

### 2.3. Chart report - Order Summary
This report shows a summary of all orders received by Coffee Inc., grouped by month.
For every month, it shows the total amount received by Coffee Inc.

# 3. Running the application
The following pre-requisites are required to run this application:

1. JDK 6.0+
2. Apache Maven 3.0.4+

Once these are installed and the application code has been checked out or downloaded
from Git, the application can be run by issuing the following command:

    mvn clean package tomcat7:run

This will compile the application (after downloading all necessary libraries) and run
an embedded Tomcat instance on port 8080.  The application can then be accessed on
<http://localhost:8080> using any web browser.

The reports can be accessed from the navigation menu on the left-hand-side of the page.
Each report can be accessed in *HTML*, *PDF* and *Microsoft Excel '97* formats.

# 4. Report files
The report designs can be found in files under the folder
`src/main/resources/org/example/report/order/history.jrxml`.

# 5. Explanation of the code
This application uses *Scala*, a programming language that runs on the JVM.  Scala
was chosen primarily due to its brevity that allows relatively small prototypes to
be developed quickly (compared to developing the same prototype with Java).  It
reduces the amount of repetitive code typically required to write a Spring MVC based
web application, without sacrificing any integration opportunities between the
frameworks used on the bespoke code written.

The application is a regular Spring MVC web application, with the following notable
additions:

1. A helper class for generating a report from a Jasper Report template and report data;
1. A helper servlet for displaying charts and graphics in an HTML report;
1. `web.xml` configuration for the helper servlet.

The reports are generated by Spring MVC *Controller* classes that can be found under
`src/main/scala/org/example/web/controller/report`.  Please refer to Spring MVC
documentation in case you are new to MVC and need more explanation on what a
*Controller* class is or how it works.

The Controller classes in turn call a class called `JasperReportGenerator` that can
be found under `src/main/scala/org/example/web/report/jasper`.  This class is responsible
for generating reports in the required format (*HTML*, *PDF* or *Microsoft Excel*) from
a report template and report data.  It has been written in a Java-like manner to
make it easy for readers to understand the flow and get familiar with Jasper Reports
API.

Controller classes pass data to `JasperReportGenerator` as a `java.util.Collection`
of objects, which is then passed on to the Jasper Reports API to be merged with the
report template.  This strategy allows the reports to be completely decoupled from
the source of the data used to generate them.  Data can be pulled out of a relational
database, local files, external systems, email systems, and so on and be passed on to
the reports in a consistent and reliable way, without the reports having to manage
the connectivity with the data source(s).

There is also a small bit of configuration in the `web.xml` file for the application:

    <web-app>
      <servlet>
        <servlet-name>jasper-report-image</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>org.example.web.servlet.jasper.GraphicsServlet</servlet-class>
        <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
      </servlet>
      <servlet-mapping>
        <servlet-name>jasper-report-image</servlet-name>
        <url-pattern>/report/graphics</url-pattern>
      </servlet-mapping>
    </web-app>

This part of the configuration maps the URL `/report/graphics` to the servlet
`org.example.web.servlet.jasper.GraphicsServlet`.  This servlet is responsible for
adding charts and graphics to HTML reports.  Internally, it uses the data passed to
a report to generate images for the charts embedded inside an HTML report.

# 6. Alternate integration options
The current Jasper Reports documentation available online suggests generating charts
and graphics using a third-party library such as JFreeChart and embedding the generated
image directly into a Jasper Report.  Although this approach works, it adds development
complexity as developers need to learn a framework such as JFreeChart in addition to
learning Jasper Reports.  Additionally, for every chart or graphic to be included in
reports, the developers would have to write code.  All of this would add significant
development overhead, making this option less practical than the one used in this
sample application, which involves generating graphics using a servlet.